--- Page 22 ---

 I  Borderline Personality Disorder: Concepts, Controversies and Definitions

 In recent years, interest in borderline personality disorder (BPD) has exploded.
 This interest is related to at least two factors.
 First, individuals meeting criteria for BPD are flooding mental health centers and practitioners' offices.
 Eleven percent of all psychiatric out patients and 19% of psychiatric inpatients are estimated to meet criteria for BPD; of patients' with some form of a personality disorder, 33% of out patients and 63% of inpatients appear to meet BPD criteria (see Widiger & Frances, 1989, for a review).
 Second, available treatment modalities appear to be woefully inadequate.
 Follow-up studies suggest that the initial dysfunction of these patients may be extreme; that significant clinical improvement is slow, taking many years; and that improvement is marginal for many years after initial assessment (Carpenter, Gunderson, & Strauss, 1977; Pope, Jonas, Hudson, Cohen, & Gunderson, 1983; McGlashan, 1986a, 1986b, 1987).
 Borderline patients are so numerous that most practitioners must treat at least one.
 They present with severe problems and intense misery.
 They are difficult to treat successfully.
 It is no wonder that many mental health clinicians are feeling overwhelmed and inadequate, and are in search of a treatment that promises some relief.
 Interestingly, the behavior pattern most frequently associated with the BPD diagnosis a pattern of intentional self-damaging acts and suicide attempts has been comparatively ignored as a target of treatment efforts.
 Gunderson (1984) has suggested that this behavior may come closest to representing the "behavioral specialty" of the borderline patient.
 The empiri cal data bear him out: From 70% to 75% of borderline patients have a his tory of a least one self-injurious act (Clarkin, Widiger, Frances, Hurt, & Gilmore, 1983; Cowdry, Pickar, & Davis; 1985).
 These acts can vary intensity from ones requiring no medical treatment (e.g. slight scratches, head banging, and cigarette burns) to ones requiring care on an intensive care unit (e.g. overdoses, self-stabbings, and asphyxiations).

--- Page 23 ---

 Nor is the suicidal behavior of borderline patients always nonfatal.
 Estimates of suicide rates among BPD patients vary, but tend to be about 9% (Stone, 1989; Paris, Brown, & NowHs, 1987; KroU, Carey, & Sines, 1985).
 In a series of BPD inpatients followed from 10 to 23 years after discharge (Stone, 1989), patients exhibit ing all eight DSM-III criteria for BPD at the index admission had a suicide rate of 3%, compared to a rate of 7% for individuals who met five to seven criteria.
 In the same study, individuals with BPD and a history of previous parasuicide had suicide rates that were double the rates of individuals without previous parasuicide.
 Although there are substantial literatures both on suicidal and self-injurious behavior and on BPD, there is virtually no communi cation between the two areas of study.
 Individuals who intentionally injure or try to kill themselves and the BPD population have a number of overlapping characteristics, which I describe later in this chapter.
 One overlap, however, is particularly noteworthy: Most individuals who engage in nonfatal self-injurious behavior and most individu als who meet criteria for BPD are women.
 Widiger and Frances (1989) reviewed 38 studies reporting the gender of patients meeting criteria for BPD; women comprised 74% of this population.
 Similarly, intentional self-injuries, including suicide attempts, are more frequent among women than among men (Bancroft & Marsack, 1977; Bogard, 1970; Greer, Gunn, & Kolller, 1966; Hankoff, 1979; Paerregaard, 1975; Shneidman, Faberow, & Litman, 1970).
 A further demographic parallel of note is the relationship of age both to BPD and to nonfatal self-injurious behaviors.
 Approximately 75% of instances of self-injurious behavior involve persons between the ages of 18 and 45 years (Greer & Lee, 1967; Paerregaard, 1975; Tuckman & Youngman, 1968).
 Borderline patients also tend to be younger (Akhtar, Byrne, & Doghramji, 1986), and BPD characteristics decrease in severity and prevalence into middle age (Paris et al, 1987).
 These demographic similarities, together with others dis cussed later, raise the interesting possibility that the research studies conduaed on these two populations, although carried out separately, have in fact been studies of essentially overlapping populations.
 Unfortunately, most studies of suicidal behaviors do not report Axis II diagnoses.
 The treatment described in this book is an integrative cognitive- behavioral treatment, dialeaical behavior therapy (DBT), developed and evalu ated with women who not only met criteria for BPD but also had histories of multiple nonfatal suicidal behaviors.
 The theory I have constructed may be valid, and the treatment program described in this book and the compan ion manual may be effective, for men as well as for nonsuicidal borderline patients.

